good afternoon everyone I'm Carol Feld
University Librarian here in marks
library we welcome you this afternoon to
the second author book talk of our 2018
academic year I don't really think I
need to do a lot of introduction that
everybody knows our guest today
scientist physician author documentary
specialist maker and and there many of
you are already acquainted with them and
friends in the audience so without a lot
of ado I just simply want to turn it
over to dr. Siddhartha Mukherjee and
we'll have a great time with him I'm
sure at the end of his talk we do have
some books available for $10 over at the
end of the Service Desk if you want to
pick up one of his books and please if
you have questions wait for me to bring
you the microphone so that you can be
captured on the video thank you
so just so that I can be heard in the
back and what is sit like this but if I
get uncomfortable I might switch places
or something because I'm sitting on the
chair edge but otherwise no one's gonna
be able to see me
in the back can I be heard in the back
yes and scene yes okay alright thank you
I'm a an enormous fan of the after
Rockefeller and really the institutional
system my students have subsequently
come here as postdocs and we've
collaborated extensively both Memorial
and with Cornell and and to some extent
with the Rockefeller so thank you for
all the resources that you've given at
least me personally in my own scientific
and medical life for me book talks
especially for this audience are
complicated because it's not clear which
direction to move in because this
obviously is a is an extraordinarily
sophisticated audience in terms of your
knowledge and understanding about the
history and the context of the science
and the medicine so I thought I'd give
you some sort of broad reflections about
things I'm thinking about and then go
into the books to pull out the sections
and we'd leave we try to leave more time
at the end for a for a sort of broader
conversation I we can make it quite
informal I will read a little bit but I
don't read a lot because then you get
you know too much reading and not enough
talking and it becomes more formal than
I want but I thought for some time about
what what kind of framework I bring to
my to the writing that I'm doing and on
a very superficial level the framework
is clear it's it I'm writing about
newest ideas in in medicine sometimes
newest ideas in science I have a I try
to keep a very human focus
and the question then becomes well is
there something beyond what's good what
is happening in in the medical and
scientific world that's exciting to me
and I it's it was very clear to me that
in fact there's some somatic elements
that run through what I've been thinking
about and and III hope and I'm it's it's
clear it's clearer and clearer to me
that the that the writing that I'm doing
either the books or the pieces in The
New Yorker or The Times magazine are
just coming out of those of those rather
fundamental ideas and so I just put them
down as a suggestion but and I'll try to
illustrate them as I as I move along the
the a lot of what I've been thinking
about and writing about really emerged
from the last section of my of the
Emperor of all maladies and the last
section again these are remember these
are books that I've grown up with I
trained as a fellow and became a cancer
physician as I wrote that the first book
and there was a moment in which at the
end of the 1990s and the early 2000s for
instance before we understood much about
the immune system and cancer and
microenvironments there was a moment in
which we there was an exhilaration that
that that we would we would find the
genes that had been turned on or turned
off oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes
in cancer and by delivering
pharmacological therapy against these
gene products we would solve cancer
create a new kind of way of thinking
about cancer that exhilaration I tried
to capture that exhilaration in the end
primality was a very it was a very
important time for us as writers and
thinkers and that exhilaration was sort
of this kind of idea you find a target
you inhibit the target sometimes
you might have to activate the target
and you'd kill yourself your virus your
bacterium and that was drawn of course
from a very classical model if you could
find an antibiotic you would direct that
against a bacterium and and somehow we
felt then that this model would
translate rather easily into complex
diseases like cancer and perhaps
diseases beyond cancer medicine beyond
cancer and this is based on the work of
many foundational work of many people
including work by Paul Ehrlich and
others the idea of specific affinity the
the phrase you know so much of Sciences
about language the phrase magic bullet
which came out of his his own his own
coining so and then actually this is a
nice picture of how Eric imagined not
just the use of antibiotics not just the
use of antibodies but the use of therapy
human therapeutics in general over here
he imagined that malignant cells would
present the whole series of targets here
shown as various blobs in various shapes
and small molecules medicines
antibiotics antibodies would bind to
these inhibit them and you would somehow
kill the cell or activate something and
he would therefore get cures for all
sorts of diseases and in fact of course
in his own lifetime he'd been very
influenced by what he himself and others
had done with antibiotics anti tubercle
Oryx and other kinds of ways of staining
cells but then that exhilaration as many
of you know in in the field began to dim
not completely there were striking
successes Gleevec is a striking success
in madnes is a striking success but the
idea that you could do this across all
cancers began to dim and we began to
have internal challenges within our own
field to rethink how
how to have a kind of framework of
thinking about medicine and whether the
potently reductionist models that we had
brought to human therapeutics may need
to be questioned whether we had over
been been over ambitious and perhaps
deluded ourselves in being so powerfully
reductionist about human therapeutics
and whether we should think again
somehow from scratch so that motivated a
lot of my work it motivated the
documentary that I did with Ken Burns
the last section of the documentary
talks about some of the disappointments
some personal disappointments that we
felt I felt in growing through this
field and what might be happy what might
what might one do next well one thing
you could say is a pox upon all of that
which would come to no good because
after all the animus to cure diseases is
important but the other way to think
about it is to perhaps think of
different models to think of different
ways of thinking about how we might
reorganize our ways of thinking about
human medicine and human therapeutics so
if you took back if I looked back and
took a step back and ask the question
what what happened after I finished the
first book and went into my documentary
the for me it was a lot about building
up again
building up a whole sense of how to
organize my thinking around medicine and
so again just to go back to the original
idea fine target inhibit rarely activate
target and killer cell I began to try to
think about I'm not the only person but
a field began to try to think about
reorganizing our understanding of human
physiology based on what I might say
building upwards rather than building
downwards from gene to self to organ or
environment and this sounds like a very
abstract concept but in fact it actuated
a massive change in my own laboratory I
can talk about that I essentially erased
much of the work that we had done before
began to concentrate on completely
different kinds of problems because I
felt that we had that we had reached a
place where you could publish papers but
the human impact of those papers would
be very limited I felt very empty
personally very empty about it and so I
changed my laboratory completely I
stopped projects and I can talk more
about that at some point of time I
stopped projects completely switched
around things and and started doing new
things I'll talk a little bit about what
those are but the idea here was that to
rethink pathology perhaps moving upwards
within a special interface or interest
in what I might call this this edge of
pathology the cell organ environment
edge of pathology why do cancers
metastasized only to some locations and
not to others what is it about the soil
that makes the seed flourish an idea
that has a long history but had somewhat
been neglected in cancer what what is
the role of cellular therapies you know
rather than focusing our attention on
VCR able should we be transplanting
cells that can kill cancer cells this
grew of course out of an interest in
immunology and and and again to some
extent going right down to not just
genes but complex networks of genes and
how they might create various ways of
thinking about diseases so I'll read a
little bit let me see if this next I'll
read a little bit from from from this
new work that I've been doing and talk a
little bit about that but really
focusing on on these areas and one one
idea that I was very intrigued by was
the two ideas I was very intrigued by
one was seed in soil so I'll read
something from a big piece that I wrote
on seed in soil the second idea was very
interested in is the idea of homeostasis
so how how is it that organism
have mechanisms to self-regulate how
these networks can in fact self-regulate
but also can can because they are not so
obvious to human understanding can can
defy very powerfully powerful
reductionist attempts to try to direct
therapies against them and and why we
can be fooled and deluded once if we can
if we want to simplify things
remembering all the time that there had
been some signal successes at least in
cancer when we had used this kind of
very very top-down model of finding
targets and therapies so here's here's a
piece that I wrote for The New Yorker
very much inspired by these ideas this
was this happened while I was changing
the laboratory that I was writing new
grants and trying to figure out why the
hell I was doing the things I was doing
so this is this is a some section
cancers like muscles mus s.e.a.l.s
proliferate in congenial habitats and
like muscles and sea creatures they can
create environments that help them
resist predators seed therapies kill
cells but that's something like spraying
a lake with a mussel poison soil
therapies by change might change but by
contrast might change the habitats when
I asked one of the scientists about a
kind of clinical study that excited him
because of its therapeutic potential he
discussed an unusual study in which
parents were patients who are diagnosed
with a primary melanoma such as his own
father would donate blood so that
researchers can identify their genetic
markers and their immune cell
composition by studying how they fare
over time he said we might learn which
patient populations are particularly
susceptible and which are particularly
resistant to cancer cancer is no more a
disease of cells than a traffic jam is a
disease of cars the British
and cancer researcher DW Smithers wrote
in the land set in 1962 a traffic jam is
due to a failure of the normal
relationship between driven cars and
their environment and can occur whether
they themselves are running normally or
not
Smithers had overstepped in his
provocation the uproar that ensued and
I'd encourage people to read the letters
that came out of Smithers talk the
uproar that ensued was clamorous and
immediate Smithers complained that he
had been lacerated by Occam's razor by
arguing that cellular relationships were
responsible for cancerous behavior he
had committed the cardinal sin of
multiplying the factors that oncologists
and cancer researchers had to consider
to deny the importance of cells in tumor
growth would be like denying the
importance of people in sociology he
later clarified cancer cells were of
course a necessary condition for the
disease but he went on to say they were
not a sufficient one his real aim was to
get beyond oncology's obsession with its
internal combustion engine the cellular
automaton and his genes and it's only
after his death that the field began to
come to grips with that message you ride
so this is a page break here by the way
so this when we when I write a piece for
The New Yorker
we actually have invented a kind of peer
review process we send it out to about a
hundred readers beforehand
and they make comments we take go and
take all the comments we incorporate
some of the comments and so forth what's
interesting is when this was sent out
still in 2017 the Smithers comments
generated an enormous storm of
commentary back many people said that's
it they said it's still nonsense and
they may be right but what's interesting
about it is that this idea that cancer
is not going to be solved and in fact
not even a Mzee scant be fully explained
by a kind of monomaniacal concentrate
on the sell alone without consideration
of its environment its immune
environment its micro environment its
metabolic environment its endothelial
environment still in 2018 generated an
incredible provocation I thought for
that very interesting you ride the
subway one morning the train is delayed
at 59th Street and a man in the Yankees
cap sneezes on you at work later that
week you feel the chill entering you
quietly you take a cab home now
sniffling cursing the C Line and
retracing your steps there was the
culprit with the cap the empty seat that
you should never have sorry
the empty seat that you should that
should have raised suspicion and that
slightly more steel bar that you should
never have touched what you don't think
about are the six other passengers
sitting nearby who also got sneezed on
but none of them are sick
this is medicines denominator problem
the numerator is you the person who gets
ill the denominator is everyone at risk
including all the other passengers who
were exposed numerators are easy to
study but denominators are hard
numerators come to the doctor's office
congested and miserable they get blood
tests and prescriptions denominators go
home from the subway station heat up
dinner and watch the strain the
numerator persists and the denominator
vanishes the widen the denominators get
sick the pathogen exposure were the same
but the hosts were different and yet
even the term pathogen is misleading a
pathogen is defined by its ability well
to be pathogenic but that may not be an
inherent attribute it may be a
relationship and interaction with the
host and that returns us to the problem
of the early detection paradigm suppose
we could install tiny sensors and people
which would regularly scan their blood
to find circulating tumor cells
conducting an ongoing liquid biopsy
we'd be catching cancers earlier than
before but as with the doctors in Seoul
this is refers to some other part of the
article we might end up over treating
more cancers than ever before that's
because these circulating tumor cells my
auger metastatic cancer in some patients
while in others the Mets never seemed to
hold take hold sorry why didn't they
make mistake
the old answer was the cancer wasn't the
right kind of guest the new question is
should we be looking to for the right
kind of host I talked to Anthony Ricci
Rd who's a profession of who's a
professor of invasion ecology at McGill
University in Montreal Ricki Rd a
biologist grew up on the banks of Lake
st. Louis which bulges out from the st.
Lawrence liver River the route through
which the muscles had metastasized into
the Great Lakes I asked him why those
freshwater mussels went into hyperdrive
when they came to our lakes and the
background to this is that they weren't
actually the mussels the same muscles
are our non invasive species in their
native lake so if you take this it's the
same the ssa begins with the question if
you think about cancer in an autonomous
manner if you think about mussels in an
autonomous manner it turns out that some
of them are actually natural residents
in their own native lakes but they're
non invasive they're you take that same
mussel and you transplant it into
different Lake it becomes
extraordinarily invasive in that that's
the basis of day after so anyway I asked
him why those freshwater mussels went
into hyperdrive when they came to our
Lakes you've got to understand the
dynamics of invasion ecology he said
it's a series of dice rolls most
organisms introduced into a new
environment will fail often because they
arrive in the wrong place at the wrong
time vast vast numbers will die piranhas
were dumped into the lake for years from
aquariums but they can't establish
because the temperature isn't right for
them but overall would you say the
temperature of the water was the key I
asked the water temperature is a factor
the water chemistry could also have
contributed ah so it's a combination of
temperature and the salinity
no no but also the calcium content
that's absolutely important I added that
to my list of drivers temperature
salinity calcium and the fact that there
weren't any well adapted predators the
native fish in these lakes won't touch
the mussels
neither will most ducks ducks
he sighed as if tossed with explaining
an immensely complex theorem
a child there are many contributing
factor although some of these factors
are clearly more important than others
it's all context dependent and so it
went for a cancer geneticist like me it
was an exercise in frustration every
time I tried to pin down a principal
cause for the invasion of muscles I was
presented with another contender
disheartened I gave up perhaps we all
gave up considering the limitations of
our knowledge methods and resources our
field may have had no choice but to
submit to the lacerations of Occam's
razor at least for a while it was only
natural that many cancer biologists
confronting the sheer complexity of the
whole organism trained their attention
exclusively on our pathogen the cancer
cell investigating metastasis seems more
straightforward than investigating non
metastasis it's tough to study those who
haven't fallen ill so that's again this
idea from this piece is called invasion
equation it came out in The New Yorker
generated lots and lots of controversy
so just keep keeping going along
obviously one feature of this what I've
been thinking about is just keeping
cognizance of time one feature I've been
thinking about again is to organize my
thinking along lines of these but
keeping a strong focus on human
therapeutics and really distancing
myself to some extent from projects that
don't have one immediate step into human
therapeutics which has obviously some
costs associated with grant funding for
instance so the the three areas again
that I was interested in as I said our
genes and genomes but not genes and
genomes as simple targets but as
maintain errs in in in network like
phenomena of the stability of an
organism
the I was I was personally very excited
by new work coming out of many
laboratories including Jonathan
Pritchard laboratory some of you may
have known this which showed that in
fact small variations would abstract
this somewhat from from what was
published but small variations in small
genetic variations in genes that might
seem to lie in in in define in pathways
that we have defined in fact have
incredible pleiotropic effects on
cellular physiology so much so that they
they defy our capacity to line them up
in simple organized organizational
systems now that itself is a provocation
I think you know are one of our jobs is
to draw lines and line diagrams in which
we say you know this this signal goes
downstream to that signal goes then to
that signal and thereby generates this
process one of the things that Pritchard
has found is that in fact if you look at
disease physiology and others have found
actually we have found if you look at
disease physiology you can often track
back disease physiology using genetic
screens to things that track far outside
what you might expect as disease
networks we throw all of those away
those are the denominators we throw all
this away we concentrate our attention
on things that are sensical to us but of
course as many of you who would actually
done these experiments know that a vast
majority are thrown away the three or
four that makes sense to you are kept
most of the time not all of the time
so I'll read now again so this is the
same idea
I'll read now I'm just don't know what
the next slide is I can skip that I'll
read now a little bit from this idea of
genes and genomes and then move on to
some sell you some some things about
cells actually no I was going to say
so I'll read now from genes and you know
the before that order to read another
piece which just came out to the right
half piece to write for me for lots of
reasons technical reasons on my father's
death people read that it came out in
the New Yorker two weeks ago but this
piece is about the idea of homeostasis
and the fact that we imagine or create
very linear systems of medical thinking
but in fact these linear systems of
medical thinking are often defined not
because things not because you know not
because they're they're out to make us
foolish but because that is the nature
of biology because the nature of our
nature of physiology is to counteract
constantly often perturbations from the
environment and our interventions
whether they be medical whether they be
a medical are you exactly that our
perturbations off someone's decaying or
maintained physiology for me as a son
tending to my father's death that was
the message the message was that
everything that I ended up doing as a
physician tending to my own father
tended to go wrong and at some point of
time I said either I'm a terrible doctor
which may also be true but also it's
possible that everything that we're
doing is a perturbation so why not then
say the entirety of medicine is a
perturbation of an often organism whose
natural direction once they have
pathology is moving in one way they're
moving southwards as it were so
therefore every perturbation that we're
doing is only going to be resisted and
actually be counter foiled by what's
happening to the natural physiology this
is not to meant to be defeatist it is
only meant to remind us that if we think
about these medical perturbations if you
think about medicine human medicines we
have to be a little wiser than I think
we've been in the past about how to
really get them to take root in the
soils that obviously in the soils that
are not working so this is a section
again from this second piece
this this is called my father's body in
at rest and in motion obviously
referring to Newton's laws and the the
central sort of conceit of this piece to
some extent is to contrast the kind of
thinking that we inherit from physics
Newtonian thinking and try to say what
does it doesn't make sense in in
medicine does it make sense in biology
does make sense in cancer medicine so it
picks up in the middle from this idea of
homeostasis in the late 1920s the
physiologist water cannon coined the
term homeostasis joining together the
Greek romeo's and stasis stillness home
uses similar in stasis stillness the
capacity to sustain internal constancy
was an essential feature of an organism
he argued his work was rooted in his
experiences working with allied troops
during the First World War as he studied
the physiological complications of
traumatic shock but it was also inspired
by the work of predecessors such as the
nineteenth-century physiologist Claude
Bernard who wrote famously the constancy
of the interior environment is a
condition of free and independent life
what is true of a well-functioning
institution may also be true of the
bodies that stop it
consider temperature the normal human
body maintains an extraordinary narrow
range somewhere between 97 and 99
degrees despite enormous and often
unpredictable variations in the
environment I boarded my Air India
flight on a chilly autumn day in New
York and was hurtled in an aluminum tube
into unseasonable warm Delhi but my core
temperature had I measured it would have
changed not one degree an emperor
penguins put human thermoregulation de
Seine as the ambient temperature is
lowered by a staggering 110 degrees a
penguin chicks core temperature changes
by one degree the level of sodium in
your blood is tightly regulated between
135 and hundred forty five million evens
per liter a number controlled by
exquisite sensors in the
brain coupled with an equally accurate
mechanism that retains or dispenses salt
and water in the kidneys Canon's insight
inverted long-established logic
physiologist for generations had
described animals as as assemblages of
machines as sums of dynamic parts
muscles were motors the heart a pump the
nerves were electrical conduits pulsing
swiveling pumping sparking the emphasis
was on movement on action on work don't
just stand there do something in
shifting physiologies focus from action
to the maintenance of fixity Canon
Barnard had fundamentally changed our
inception or our conception of how the
human body works a major point of
physiological activity paradoxically was
to enable stasis don't just do something
stand there all around cannon theorists
were thrilling to the idea of self
writing systems resistant to the
buffeting forces of change the English
botanist Arthur Tansley coined the word
ecosystem in 1935 the maintenance of
stability would soon be described as one
of the cardinal properties of ecologies
and soon economists were relating
homeostasis to self-correcting markets
Norbert Wiener the mathematician saw
that machines and creatures might be
governed by autonomous control systems
stabilized by feedback loops cells
cities societies even political
institutions had the capacity to steady
their states through the actions of self
regulated and counter poised forces and
Lewis Carroll's Red Queen was their
symbolic monarch the world is spinning
so fast on her feet she tells Alice that
it takes all the running you can do to
keep right in the same place so this
goes on a little bit what was he like in
at rest and in motion this is my father
he loved to travel nearly as much as my
mother lode to in the early days of
every summer while I was growing up he
would come home one evening with four
tickets and a visa form and announce
that we would be decamping in a
fortnight or so to some unfamiliar
foreign location cairo addis ababa
bangkok pre glasnost
Moscoe post shot iran while my mother
stood privately about stood privately
about what to pack whom to ask for
advice and what to feed her children
during the trip it's tempting to
psychologize this he was the boy who had
been forced to flee his home but
sometimes as he liked to point out a
ticket across the border is a ticket
across the border oh and he loved
markets malls particularly Americans one
American one's depressed him terminally
to shop without confrontation was to die
without a battle
when signs reading fixed-price began to
appear in delis shopping arcade mainly
to fend off bargain hounds like him he
saw it as a symbol of the impending end
of civilization but he never met a man
with a pushcart whom he didn't give his
heart to perhaps it was fated then that
the first of his Falls more than a year
earlier occurred as he made his way back
from the neighborhood market with the
bag of onions in each hand that the
first responders were fruit and
vegetable vendors who know him by name
and who knew exactly where he lived and
that they brought him home like slightly
banged up royalty on a repurposed fruit
cart he told us that he had tripped on a
loose stone and for a while things
seemed to settle at home but the word
had already begun to shift around him
his sense of balance worsened daily my
mother hired a physical therapist a
carpenter came to attach firm wooden
rails to the bed that he's all pal he'd
he'd always slept in when I went to see
him late that summer it seemed as if a
biblical punishment had rained down on
him the man who wanted to be constantly
on the move was confined to his bed his
shoes confiscated his cane hidden so
that he would not find it and be tempted
to roam one night when he was
particularly delirious we tied him to
the bed railings with pajama strings to
keep him from falling off I woke up in
the half-light of dawn and saw him
crying softly into his bound hands and
promised never to do that again and then
quietly a new kind of physiology began
to coalesce around him the fruit and
vegetable sellers began to turn up at
home the daytime nurse a scraggly young
man named Bishnu the God among other
things of maine's
it's in preservation made a habit of
propping him up in his rocking chair on
the balcony every morning and having the
various vendors congregate below like a
worshipful throng my father was
delighted to be back among the believers
he would banter with them from above a
king under house arrest but a king
nonetheless berating them about their
prices protesting the abysmal quality of
the eggplants asking why he at his age
must suffer the sins of their bruised
cauliflowers and why why the fish was
never quite fresh it was a small miracle
mr. Mukherjee could not go to the market
so the market came to mr. Mukherjee in
retrospect I understood that this too
was a homeostasis of sorts
the little ritual saved him they staved
off another fall they restored his
dignity his need for constancy at death
you break up philip larkin wrote the
bits that will you start speeding away
from each other forever with no one to
see but for a while my experience of my
father's dying who was not his breaking
up into cometary bits it was the
opposite his being held together by
infinitude of my new forces he knew he
was losing the cosmic bargain but the
onion seller at least would still cut
him a good deal and then things fell
apart in Hemingway sort of way gradually
at first and there all at once Vishnu
had to go home to his village because
his hepatitis had flared and so a new
attendant was recruited to replace him
the daily routine now devolved into
chaos one afternoon when my father
should have been safely positioned on
the balcony the attendant left him at
home within a few minutes my father had
squirmed out of his chair eased his feet
into his slippers and tottered his way
to the kitchen he touched my mother's
right shoulder a small gesture so
familiar to her from his normal days
that she neglected to turn around and
question why he was standing in the
kitchen beside her by the time she'd
spun around he was beginning to tumble
sideways he hit his head on the richly
vain marble countertop that he was so
proud of cala cara he would say not
Calcutta to remind people how far he'd
come in life and then he landed with a
dull clod on the floor a blow to the
brain is a good way to eat
someone from the equilibrium of free and
independent life of all organs the brain
ironically has the least room to expand
the skull is a fixed space elsewhere in
the body blood will eventually flow out
but blood in the skull can stay in like
a festering secret forming a clot and
then pressing down on the neural tissue
the clot can grow further increasing the
pressure and progressively crippling
brain function in a cascading process
beyond the reach of homeostasis indeed
once self-regulation fails complex
systems of all kinds can be claimed by
version of this process sometimes called
a failure cascade a storm-battered tree
takes down a transmission line the
increased load caused is another network
to fail further increasing the load
turning a local outlet outage into a
regional blackout such as the power of
homeostasis that it's hard to see such a
failure cascade coming everything
returns to normal until normality itself
gives way about two hours offers fall in
the kitchen my father seemed fine except
for a bruise that had ripened on his
forehead he asked for some water and
then sat in his chair glowering about
his disrupted morning the vendors had
left about four hours in he said he said
he felt uncomfortable his neurons under
pressure were sending him mixed messages
he was warned one minute and cold the
next he stripped his shirt off sweating
profusely that he wanted a blanket he
ate lunch like a sullen goldilocks the
chapatis were too hot the doll was not
spicy enough and then he was overwhelmed
with the need to sleep he woke up an
hour later his arms flailing his
delirious and my mother phoned me soon
after the speed of his unravelling was
breathtaking in that ICU ward his sodium
dropped precipitously 131 128 122 his
coma deepened from the imbalance of
salts and then his breathing dialed from
the coma carbon dioxide an acid when
mixed with water accumulated in his
blood his heart began to behave
bizarrely the muscle sluggish the
rhythms erratic from the strange
cocktail of acids bases and salts
circulating his blood and then his
kidneys began to fail and because his
kidneys were failing his brain function
worsened and thereby refueled the cycle
of decay but he wouldn't just
yet yet to be bargained into it his body
fitfully rallied hanging on to the final
constancies of life with a kind of
primordial cunning as if my father knew
down in his blood and in his bones that
sometimes the market turns against you
that sometimes you must sell it for the
best among bad deals and that a
miserable equilibrium is still in
equilibrium a sodium of 125 he would
take it but with some cross-subsidy he
would shut down sectors of his brain as
long as he could keep his heart so
that's this section homeostasis and then
maybe I thought I would read finally
from the gene so we have more time what
can I be finishing ok ok plenty of time
ok and maybe I'll come back to this idea
of seed in soil
so this is from the last section of the
gene and here I was trying to get to the
idea of a sense of the future I had just
read in preprints actually the articles
are still in preprints I just read in
preprints two attempts at describing
very complicated human features by
through genetic variants alone
actually have a picture of one of them
it's in the middle of the talk but I'm
happy to show it yuge which it which
shook me a little bit and that was to
solve the missing heritability of height
as many of you know height human height
is extraordinarily heritable it's one of
the one of the hot them one of the most
heritable features that we know tall
parents tend to have tall children
shorter parents tend to have shorter
children but attempts previous attempts
to use various technologies to predict
human height based on genetic variation
had been relatively unsuccessful and so
this idea that you could not really get
to the variation of human height based
on genetic variation based on known
genetic variation was a challenge in the
field it was many people have called it
different names but was called the
missing heritability of height we knew
it was heritable but what what what the
features were the factors were they were
contributing to height were unknown and
this remained the case for a long time
until I read this paper after I was
finishing my book and I read this paper
it was then in preprint it's still in
some kind of preparation
I'll come back to this I think these are
important so this this was the basically
the summary of it it was from a
computational physicist who started this
work and he went into a large bio bank
now available publicly the UK biobank
and he used a what he called a deep
learning algorithm I I'm not a real
expert but what he did essentially is to
summarize it very to a layperson was
that he tried to use an algorithmic way
to fit on one axis the variation so
basically imagine an enormous bio Bank
it I think now has 500,000 humans and
you have very abstractly speaking you
have their genetic variations on one
edge of the Y bank or one line the bio
bank each of these individuals across
the entire genome and you have their
actual height as as another point and
the question is can a an algorithm
attach connection weights to each of
these enormous set of variations so that
you ger them can predict what the actual
height is going to be based on genetic
information alone no information about
the parents just based on genetic
information alone and this was one
attempt it's apparently been refined
since then and you can see that it
doesn't perform this is the predicted
height this is the actual height doesn't
perform exactly accurately but it was
already to me it was already two other
shocking because the fact that you could
base the fact that you could potentially
based on genetic information alone
predict the height of your unborn child
begins to say something about a new
universe that we might enter in because
of course the things that I was
interested in was not height I was
interested in breast cancer risk but but
the investigators told me what they were
working on extremely complex genetic
architecture nearly three
five thousand genes involved in just the
prediction of height I think this might
have been refined since that time but
this is what they were working on they
were working on complex inheritable
cancers so very much what I'm interested
in in our in our field going back just
to give you a sense this is that this is
the kind of genetics that we grew up
with this is Rako one this is the
pedigree for back of one but anyone
who's really been a cancer physician or
I don't call it a cancer researcher
knows that there are many many many
women and men who have histories of
breast cancers and their families who
are obviously cannot be ascribed to just
wrapped a one rack or two or even some
of the other genes that have been
discovered since then single gene
mutations so in fact that's the majority
of women with familiar breast cancer I
think the numbers are not something like
70% of women with familial breast cancer
cannot be described as having mutations
in one of the six or seven genes that
that confer single gene risk and in the
in the vocabulary of breast cancer there
was a word that came up called bracketry
some of may have heard of this bracketry
was the was that was the word used to
describe these women it was like an
unknown risk it was like not having a
gene but knowing that you had the
syndrome not having a genetic annotation
but knowing that you were at risk
because of familial disease so the idea
was that that they were going after
complex and hearable cancers so that we
might be able to actually assign risk to
a person based on their genetic
information but then what else were they
doing I said well let's are you
interested in diseases as I said but
they were interested in IQ whatever that
might be we can talk about it skin color
bone density mental illness etc etc etc
etc etc and the idea was that although
the heritability of many things of many
of these begins to drop it's not as
clear as height that if they could get
somewhere that they could continue
refine continue to refine this analysis
with more and more with larger and
larger datasets to begin to a
proximate the heritability of some of
these syndromes so I don't need to tell
this audience that this is a very very
destabilizing idea at least it was for
me being able to predict complex
features of our children based on
genomic and genetic information even
understanding that the environment can
play an important role in all of this
leaving aside that question is
fundamentally fundamentally
destabilizing so I'll I'll read it from
the end of the gene this this is from
the last section and it goes back to
where the gene begins which is a it is
the history of my mental illness in my
family schizophrenia and bipolar
disorder so we're coming back to set the
scene were coming back from visit to my
cousin who's my paternal cousin who's in
in a in a you know in a mental
institution permanently confined because
he has no other services he's lost all
services on the way back from Moniz
institution in Calcutta my father wanted
to stop again outside the house where
he'd grown up the place where they had
brought his brother this is my uncle
back in the throes of his mania we drove
in silence we left the car at the narrow
inlet of - Lane and walked into the
cul-de-sac on foot it was about 6:00 in
the evening the houses were lit by an
oblique smelling smoky light and the air
threatened rain Bengalis have only one
event in their history partition my
father said he was looking up at the
balconies jutting above us and trying to
recall the names of his former neighbors
a gentle drizzle began to descend on us
or perhaps it was just the drippings
from the laundry hanging fickler on
clotheslines tacked across the houses
partition was the defining event for
every man and woman in this city either
you lost your own home or your home
became a shelter for someone else he
pointed to : up to the Kullen odds of
windows above our head every family here
had another family
with in it there were households within
households rooms inside rooms when we
arrived here with our fortress two
trunks and a few salvaged % possessions
we thought we were beginning a new world
we had experienced a catastrophe but it
was also a fresh start every house on
that street I knew had its own story of
steel trunks and salvaged possessions It
was as if all the inhabitants had been
equalized like a garden cut back to the
roots in the winter for a cohort of men
and women including my father
the journey from east to west bengal
therefore involved a radical resetting
of all clocks thus began year zero time
was splintered into two halves the era
before the Cataclysm and the era after
BP and AP this vivisection of history
the partition of partition produced a
strangely dissonant experience the men
and women of my father's generation
perceived themselves as unwitting
participants in a natural experiments
once the clocks had been reset to zero
It was as if you could watch the lives
fates and choices of human beings played
out from some starting gate or from the
beginning of time from the beginning of
artificial time my father had
experienced this is experimental all too
acutely one brother had devolved into
mania and depression another sense of
reality had splintered what force or
mechanism might explain such widely
divergent fates and choices of
individual human beings in the 18th
century an individual's destiny was
commonly described as a series of events
ordained by God Hindus had long believed
that a person's fate was derived with
nearly arithmetic precision by some
calculus of the good and evil acts that
he had performed in a previous life God
in this scheme was a glorified moral tax
accountant tallying and divvying
portions of good and bad fate based on
past investments and losses the
Christian God capable of inexplicable
compassion and equally inexplicable Roth
was a more mercurial bookkeeper but he
too was the ultimate if more inscrutable
arbiter of destiny
19th and 20th century medicine offered a
more secular conception of fate and
choice illness
perhaps the most concrete and universal
acts of all apps of fate could now be
described in mechanistic and
pathological terms not as the arbitrary
visitation of divine vengeance but as
the consequence of risks exposures
predispositions conditions and behaviors
choice was understood as an expression
of an individual psychology but also of
experiences memories traumas and
accumulated personal history by the mid
20th century identity affinity
temperament and preference straightness
versus gayness or impulsivity versus
caution were increasingly described
therefore as phenomena caused by the
intersections of psychological impulses
personal histories with some element of
random choice in other words an
epidemiology of destiny and choice was
being born in the early decades of the
21st century we're learning to speak yet
another language of cause and effect
we're beginning to describe illness
identity affinity temperament
preferences and ultimately fate and
choice in terms of genes and genomes
this is not to make the absurd claims
that genes are the only lenses through
which fundamental aspects of our nature
and destiny can be viewed but it is to
propose and give serious consideration
to one of the most provocative ideas
about our history and future that the
influence of genes and gene networks on
our lives and beings is Richard deeper
and ultimately more unnerving than we
had previously imagined this idea
becomes even more provocative as we
learn to interpret alter and ultimately
manipulate our genes intentionally
thereby acquiring the ability to alter
future fates and choices nature may
after all be entirely approachable
Thomas Morgan wrote in 1919 he continued
her much advertised inscrutability has
once more been found to be an illusion
I've often thought about the possible
trajectories of my cousins and uncles
lives if they had been born in the
future say 50 or 100 years from now
would our knowledge of their inherited
vulnerabilities be used to find cures
for the illnesses that had devastated
their lives would that knowledge be used
to normalize them
if so what moral social and biological
hazards would that entail with such
forms of knowledge enable new kinds of
empathy and understanding a new medicine
or would they also nucleate novel forms
of discrimination would the knowledge be
used to define ultimately what is
natural but what is natural
on one hand variation mutation change in
constancy divisibility and flux and on
the other hand constancy permanence
indivisibility fidelity it should hardly
surprise us that DNA a molecule of
contradictions this is a quote encodes
an organism of contradictions we seek
constancy in heredity and find its
opposite variation mutants are necessary
to maintain the essence of ourselves our
genome has negotiated a fragile balance
between counterpoise forces pairing
strand with opposite strand mixing past
and future pitting memory against desire
it is the most human definitionally of
all things that we possess its
stewardship may therefore be the
ultimate test of knowledge and a
discrimination for our species stop
there and we'll have questions
[Applause]
hi Paul did you clap did you clap that
was the condition members of your family
had schizophrenia or they didn't have
schizophrenia I wonder what your
thinking is about these results which
should come out if you're spending
hundreds of millions of dollars but
they've come up with his thousand genes
each of which give you one or two
percent increase in the probability of
getting it and you don't see a scaling
of that you don't how can you explain or
do you have any thoughts about how the
people who spend all that money can
explain those results well I think
they're really we let's take a step back
the step back that I think is important
is I'm not a neurologist or a
psychiatrist but I follow the field
closely because of my own family history
just take a step back I think there it's
quite clear that some variants are
highly heritable we know that from twin
studies we also know that from family
histories and that the and in fact that
the the latest there was a study just
concluded last two months ago where the
heritability for this some of the
severus forms of schizophrenia was up to
eighty eighty five percent so with
numbers like that I have if we had a
large enough cohort I suspect much like
these very highly heritable features
that we would in fact find the genes
that were responsible and my suspicion
is that it could still it would still be
on the orders or on the order of
thousand two thousand three thousand
genes so it would not surprise me that
our older genetic methods will fail that
we have to find more powerful genetic
methods and some of those powerful
genetic methods will go along these
lines in which we will have to teach
algorithms to attach connection weights
as it were to the massive range of human
variation
and the sad story there will be if you
end up with 5,000 genes how do you
assign how do you create a biologically
plausible pathway potentially for
medicine if you're lucky you might be
able to so in other words if it's if
it's really for a single patient death
by a thousand cuts 5,000 cuts and each
of them is contributing small amounts of
risk is everyone understanding what I'm
saying by the way yeah each of them is
under siege of them is contributing a
small amount of risk much like in height
then Isis I wonder if our capacity to
think about medical intervention for
these people will be thwarted because we
can't organize that information into
plausible pathways and and deliver
medicines now I'm not a pessimist about
this I just think that we need to think
about these things as we are throwing
around terms like personalized medicine
for psychiatry we have to be cautious
and think about what if it turned out to
be that most complex mental absorbs
illness not just mental illness most
complex illness fell in this spectrum in
which small risks accumulated across the
genome each contributing small risk
ultimately adds up to the phenotype of
illness and we cannot compute or
understand plausible interventional
biological pathways to understand this
further I suspect that that's where we
end up we'll end up going I'll give you
one at one last example power which is
relevant because we know this a little
bit for cardiovascular disease so if you
look at people there's a nice study out
recent if you look at people who have
young people who are at high risk for
myocardial infarction of a hundred such
people two can be explained by one to
two genetic gene variants so those are
people who have familial
hypercholesterolemia or some other you
know pcsk9 alterations 98 of those
people who have em is at a young age lie
in this what I would call the bracketry
category of how
disease in which they have in that case
three to five hundred maybe a thousand
genes contributing small amounts of risk
which add up to their actual risk so the
question then becomes what do we do
about that
and I've been thinking about that
question so what could we do about that
we could do we we could identify and
quantify the risk and then we have three
kinds of choices I think all of which
have caveats we could if we could we
could do embryo selection all sorts of
moral hazards raised by that if there
were a few enough so for instance if we
knew the five thousand our genes gene
variants that were contributing to
schizophrenia risk and if we could if we
had a baby which had all five thousand
of those and we could quantify based on
what we knew the risk of them developing
schizophrenia at what number I don't
know what number I mean I had this is my
own family's history maybe I have them
we could choose to not have that child
we could choose to find an actionable
target but that might be tough it might
defy our capacity to do so if you have
to if there was one dominant target we
in some fantastical world could crisp it
out not so easy but aside from this I'm
not sure what else to do anyone has any
thoughts I love them
nation then for the fact that there is
large numbers of genes each contributing
1% to the probability you'll get the
disease and yet it's an all-or-nothing
disease well I don't think I mean in
other words in medicine there there are
there are I don't think that defies
logic does it I mean in other words the
ultimate phenotype of a disease of
course is the you know we not with
there's an environmental interaction
which I'm putting aside for a second
but the ultimate development of a
disease of a full-blown disease is is
demarcated by a physician that's because
they're drawing a line somewhere they're
saying you know you have sub psychotic
illness you don't have you know that one
psychotic episode never again you're not
schizophrenic you know you have 17 you
are most people I suspect lying spectra
of this we know this from family
histories the definition of a disease I
don't all as an all-or-nothing
phenomenon is a human definition
particularly with mental illness so that
doesn't surprise me that you can
accumulate small amounts of risk and be
tipped over ultimately towards having a
disease or not it's not it's not
surprising to me as a in terms of
physiology and I certainly know it's not
submissive it would not be surprising to
anyone working in cancer their common
actually other questions that was a
great talk and a wonderful reading thank
you so much for coming to visit with us
what are your thoughts sort of
dovetailing off of this on people who
are normal and healthy getting their
genome sequence through 23andme and what
are your thoughts in terms of what
that's going to look like in the future
what's with my thoughts about this are
that it's just it's it's far too early
to be to have any real substantive thing
to say about your own genome sequenced
in in through a commercial entity you
will certain which we will we the things
that that that we'll find are mutations
generally in mutations in highly
penetrant genes which cause disease
through a single genetic
Braca one bracket to cystic fibrosis
fibrosis genes huntington Huntington's
genes etc etc you'll find those a poe
familial hypercholesterolemia the things
that we've all learned our classical
genetic understanding medical genetic
understanding on I have to say that it's
it should be a matter of some
embarrassment and shame for us that it
was not that despite having all this
funding in this country the first
countries to mount a public genome
project was the UK and in fact the
riches of that project with all their
complications some of which I showed you
are already emerging so I think by the
time you get to five hundred thousand
million two million four million six
million genomes all of which have been
cross annotated with whatever feature
you're interested in breast cancer risk
prostate cancer risk other kinds of risk
factors for diseases I'm interested in
cancer that's why I keep saying cancer
but you might be interested in something
else that's when you start getting an
enormous amount of depth of
understanding I suspect given the nature
of the information 20,000 our genes plus
all the intragenic variants introns etc
etc you probably need on the order of
several million the before you can start
getting at fundamental questions of of
risk I think well I think
technologically we could get there
four million genomes doesn't lie outside
five million genomes doesn't lie outside
the capacity of sequencing ability or
storage of information now those were
upper limits in the past but that's not
the case now what word that will what
kind of world that will auger is a
totally separate question and this
actually I don't know if you know this
but but so Ken Burns is also doing the
gene as a film and we've already started
shooting doing interviews for it they
were at the Rockefeller maybe eight nine
months ago and that's one of the
questions that's echoes through the film
because this is where we're edging up to
so the last section is questions like
you're asking Paul questions like you're
asking you know okay sorry
I've two very disparate questions but
since I have a mic I like them you can
ask them both
I'm gonna read some water the the first
question is trying to reconcile your
first part of the talk when it talked
about the the involvement of environment
both micro and macro environment yeah
and your final part of the talk which
really focused on the intrinsic nature
of multiple but genes which are all
contained which are cell intrinsic yeah
which determind largely everything in
some in some studies so how do you
reconcile the the influence that the
environment plays in with the genes that
seems to be having such a preponderance
very clear it is far from obvious to me
the two points that you're making are
far from obvious to me and and we should
be clear about them the gene variants
that set up risk for disease may not be
and in fact are often not going to be
cell autonomous we know this again from
cancer risk they may in fact be genes
that are micro environmental we know
this actually from multiple multiple
studies so let's just be clear about
that so just because they're genes
doesn't mean that they're autonomous to
the cell that's causing pathology they
may be in the stromal cell they may be
in the the gene variant may be an immune
gene variant etc but gets keep going
down to some extent it seems to be
independent of the environment the macro
environment a macro in fire
are so that was the first question and
that the second question is talking
about homeostasis and and the fact that
you if you if you start looking at an
organism and it's pathology trying to
pull it southwards and kind of
irredeemable some extent but that is not
true in majority of the cases majority
of the disease's we can cure really well
the flu for example we don't have to do
much but the body is able to fix itself
right most of us get most of the
diseases that we will have in a lifetime
I think our body is able to fix it
either with some nudging or without the
ones they cannot will accumulate and
lead it Southwest but what I'm trying to
say is it's probably not always true
that we are that all the pathology is
permanent and and going to I think you
know claim here at all pathology is
permanent and what's interesting is I
don't have this in this slide there's
actually a nice one piece of information
that you might like to know is is the
curve of all-cause mortality in the
United States which looks like actually
the interesting curve it's interesting
because we are in 2018 which is exactly
100 years from 1918 which of course was
the Spanish flu so if you look at the
curve of pathology of mortality in the
United States it starts off in the 1900s
slowly hip goes downwards there's a peak
at in 1918 then drops down again
continues to drop downwards and finishes
downwards that's understandable what's
interesting is if you split that curve
into two components the so-called
infectious and chronic causes of disease
which goes to your point about the flu
the infectious mortality in the United
States entirely parallels that total
mortality so it looks like this it comes
down Peaks up in 1918 drops down again
and continues to fall what does the
curve of therefore what must the curve
of non-infectious mortality in the
United States
across 118 years look like any guesses
it's a completely flat line from 1900 to
2018 if you plot with everything we've
done it's not totally flat if you look
at it at my Chris cope and there's a
little dip
towards the end of about six five six
years but it's but it's an astonishing
split if I have time I'll show to you
how I should have a plot of it somewhere
if I have time I showed you actually
it's it's a it's it's worth seeing
because it's a it's so enlightening
sorry I keep talking on I'll show it to
my computer is not working too well so I
so the first question has two parts to
it one is that the micro environmental
variation will be captured in in genetic
risk macro environment variation is it
completely or absolutely right it's a
complete different universe and it's we
know very little about it I think for
some diseases like cardiovascular
disease we know a little bit more for
other diseases we know very little so I
think we it's not going to be captured
this is just for fun
model in many ways and he has two
questions so you ask so my other
question after we go through this curve
you had mentioned this older model so
total mortality infectious mortality
non-infectious mortality okay so you had
mentioned this model of you know
thinking about a gene and it's specific
product and if we target that product
then we can cure disease and you
mentioned that you have restructured
your laboratory around different
paradigms I was wondering if you could
tell us a little bit about the new
paradigms that you're thinking of in
research and how you've restructured
your work around those paradigms so some
of it is still in process and some of it
has been very unsuccessful so the but
I'll tell you what what the principles
are the principles are that if a project
does not have one step away from human
utility we are not we don't do them the
second principle is that the outlet for
the natural that the outlet for every
project should be a human clinical trial
or a and take this as you will or a
company that supports a human clinical
trial so basically a an entrepreneurial
outlet and if it's not that if it's not
easily perceivable in one to two steps
we won't we won't do the work the people
who come to train in the laboratory I
generally tell them that I'm not very
good I think at training them to be pis
in academic settings I will train them
to be I can train them to be physician
scientists to go back to the clinic but
if they're seeking but I can train them
to lead entrepreneurial roles to bring
medicines to human beings I can train
them to run clinical trials but I unlike
lis to be able to train them to be a to
BP is the granting system of the
laboratory has moved from more NIH or r1
funded to more and more funded through
things that I couldn't previously had a
very hard time dealing with but
organizations that support very project
focused research and I can go on and on
and on
on it it is anathema to academic
practice but I could only do it once I
had tenure basically but it's totally
anathema torque academic practice and in
fact we have said that we will we have
split to some extent our priorities so
that we're on the rare circumstance that
we have I think a high impact finding
which has which has relevance to human
physiology because of the
predispositions we will publish in fancy
journals but we won't grovel at the that
you know trying to publish in cell in
nature we publish before there we won't
rubble and grow through the groveling
process that that occurs in publishing
and fancy journals because if the
research is not impactful we'll know it
up front and we'll just won't do it
and rather we will publish papers in
preprint if possible we will open it to
the community to criticize we will open
it to replication will actually often
publish replicated results and as I said
it's an it's an athame to academic
practice if I had started this seven
years ago there's no chance that I would
would be at at the university that I'm
in so that's one sometimes I can talk to
you more and more about it and we've
said also that the outlet the successful
outlet for a scientific experiment
should be a human trial thank you you
talk very movingly about the end of life
at the beginning of life I think we're
doing better than we did eighty years
ago the end of life I'm not so sure what
do you think you know I think I I think
it's not it I think it's not as bad as
we we make it out to be actually if you
look at real numbers the United States
is actually not doesn't do badly with
hospice care for instance our goals are
sometimes not aligned we fight for a
little bit longer than we would normally
fight for but our goals are but I think
that we as a country have become more
thoughtful about
end-of-life care about hospice about
terminating medical intervention in fact
the numbers reflect that there's a
there's a there's a little bit of a
misperception hospice costs more in this
country than it costs in other places it
often happens later than it happens in
other places but the use of hospice the
use of palliative care the use of
end-of-life care is not as bad as you
would imagine so
in fact it lies in line with several
European countries some European
countries are outliers in that but it
lies in line with them those are my
thoughts about it yes I second the idea
that the way that you talked about
homeostasis was very moving
so thank you and the discussion made me
think also about chronic illness and
disability whether you have homeostasis
maintained at a different level than you
do in like a healthy person and I'm
wondering do you think that it's
valuable to consider how those
homeostasis ease are re-established and
chronic illnesses are very unknown to us
we I think often in medicine we project
our understanding of normal physiology
into abnormal physiology in other words
we make a conceptual leap and say oh you
know in pathology it must be the case
that everything else remains the same
but the only thing that's altered in
this is as I said this is a very
reductionist gene focused approach and
is correct so if you look at just to
give you one example if you look at CML
chronic myelogenous leukemia if you look
at the pathology of people with CML if
you look at a bone marrow of people with
CML in fact the bone marrow is restored
basically close to normal see once
they're on appropriate medicine once
they're on targeted therapy and this
gave us some confidence that oh you know
there's a there's a switch so you toggle
the switch in one direction a person
goes into pathology you give them a
medicine they toggle the switch off in
the other direction they it gets
restored but we're finding out more and
more that that's not the case with many
other cancers
that there are a series of effects that
underlie the ultimate development of the
syndrome of a disease just to give you
some examples I mean the people here
from from the immunology world obviously
the one of the first examples would be
that we now know which we didn't suspect
to the extent we do about the nature of
the of the nature of the of the tumor
microenvironment that has to obtain in
order for a tumor to resist and to grow
in the context of an immune system so
there's fundamental features of immune
dysfunction locally which we didn't know
about we knew but scientifically but
it's become quite clear in human studies
as well more and more clearing human
studies so so you're absolutely right I
think projecting imagining disease as
you know here's a human being and a
pathological switch is toggled and you
know and that if we retool that
pathological switch we would shut it off
and restore balance I think is is
simplistic I think many many such
mechanisms often are pushed to that
tipping point in break ultimately
leading to disease and switching one of
these back to normal
often won't reset the whole disease and
I can give you very particular examples
of such things
yep yes
I reveal your um any shows you could
share a little bit about your writing
career how you came to write the books
that you ended up writing did you did
you write before you wrote the Emperor
of all maladies what type of writing had
you had you been doing how do you
structure your sort of writing process I
had written a little bit before but
obviously nothing of the ambition of the
Emperor I you know wrote it I wrote the
first book as a fellow and I think this
the secret of for me there was to tell
no one I just did not tell anyone
because they were the world is full of
inhibitory synapses virtually all the
synapses are inhibitory so so once one
way of moving forward is also not to be
secretive about it but just to just to
move forward and it helped that that I
could bring some freshness to the to the
equation that's actually tend to like to
write like that rather than writing like
an expert and saying I know the I know I
know everything obvious not true but is
to start and discover the process anew
it actually animates the right kind of
writing I think so that so and what's my
process now like so I've written a
little bit didn't write for about six
years when I when I worked on the
Emperor then again went into you know I
had a kind of kind of I was I was unable
to produce something for a while then
went back to starting to write the gene
she finished the film with Ken went back
to writing the gene and then have now
finally decided I'm going to write it so
the books the books were meant to be a
trilogy and the third is a history of
immunology and the reason is that I
began to understand that it's probably
one of the first cellular systems or
organ systems that we've learned to
learn to engineer and we're coming up to
a time that you know if you imagine that
a vaccine a vaccine as an attempt to
engineer a cellular system which it is
it would be one of the first cellular
systems that we've learned to engineer
very much like that like the gene was is
one of the first biological
informational systems we've done to
engineer so there's some analogies that
drive this kind of process what else can
I tell you it's it's my writing process
a little bit frazzled I mean I sort of
go back to something abandon it come
back it's I don't have a very linear way
of doing things I'm terrible with
deadlines what else you want to know
those are some things yes sorry it's a
wait for the microphone because people
won't be able to hear you in the back oh
you can have mine telling stories I'm
curious about what drove you to choose
writing and now that you're dabbling in
film I'm curious about if when you
compare those processes for you of
course now that you're working with film
you have the backbone already prepared
and the create much of the creative
processes happen but they are definitely
very different media to be able to tell
stories and reach different audiences
and reach the same audience in different
ways and I'm curious about in the
context of science and medicine how
effective each has been for you and sort
of your experience of knowing how to
pick the appropriate vignettes and the
appropriate yeah well so Phil I'm not a
filmmaker by any stretch of the
imagination but I like to collaborate
very heavily ken and I had a very
successful collaboration around cancer I
think because we both came out of it
very energized so the the the the
filmmaking aspects are very much his
the other hand I the the the scripting
was done for Emperor was done by
extraordinary group of scriptures
including Jeffrey Ward and David listing
and Barrack Goodman who really took up
all the heavy work of scripting I worked
quite closely with them I work very
closely with Barack and Jeffrey and and
what the typical process of working
would be that they would bring me bring
something you know we had probably 80
viewings during the process of making
maybe 90 viewings and we would sit down
and sort of move things around and
everyone had a kind of role to play my
role was what I called I was the human
mind er which is to remind people that
no it's a principle by which Emperor and
Jean was written no five pages should go
by without a real human story this goes
back to my lab and so that was I was a
human mind I would tell them no no five
minutes has gone by we need to go back
to someone's life it could be a
scientists life it could be a medical a
doctor's life it had to be someone's
life it couldn't be some abstraction in
space
Jeffrey Ward who's a great writer he
wrote Vietnam most most recently he's an
astonishing guy wrote wrote the
Roosevelts Jeffrey was the as he calls
it he was the he was the creator of
stupid sentences because in the film
world and also again when you write at
some point of time someone has to say a
stupid sentence which is something which
goes something like and therefore we
learn right but you have to be able to
say it in a way that's nuanced in and
interesting and powerful and thoughtful
but essentially what you're saying is
and from this we learnt that or here is
where we are it is now 1962 and we are
in Boston right you have to be able to
convey that because otherwise it becomes
too fancy and everyone gets confused so
to everyone had rose barracks are
consummate filmmaker Ken's really
FileMaker have but also very very very
good editor so he would cut cut cut cut
cut cut cut
so anyway those were the processes we
have time for one last question and then
we can talk sorry
last two questions then we can stop yes
related to that end of life question
yeah I hope you still remember that I
rotated at Mass General with you
when I was a medical student actually so
when I rotated with you I told that I
was kind of I just lost my dad with
cancer and then so you like try to
convince me to be unconscious and then
you come to us so to run like some
integrative medicine rated both positive
care and then right
you know politics now yes see how I'm
you owe me 20 bucks then my question is
like after you were Ross over your dad
yeah so you were recommendation it's
still buried so yes I think so you know
as I said I think you know I'm not the
only physician who's lost their father
in human history I think but it was to
me again it was a reminder of things
that I had thought about in medicine but
hadn't fully internalized or fully
understood and people you know people
when they some some people when they
lose their parents think about some
things I thought about homeostasis
one last question sorry
I'm curious how the sort of rise of your
writing career has affected your your
life as a doctor not so much you know in
terms the way you think conceptually but
just quite more literally in terms of
you know who you interact with patients
you see just your day-to-day life yeah
it's affected quite quite badly as you
can imagine one thing is that I had to
cut my to bring down my clinic seek out
which I did successfully seek out
partners that would take care of
patients on the day to day basis because
I was actually failing to do that very
well what rather than rather but rather
than doing that as a primary effort
I switched mostly again the principle
that I I'd like to think that working
from principles is better than then
finding principles after you've done the
work so the idea that I had was that I
should just run trials I should be a PI
on trials and I should just run them and
provide some I would get personal
gratification from that and also be able
to bring some skills that I think are
for me better skills into the process so
[Music]
virtually all of my clinic now focuses
on on trial running everyone's on trial
everyone's on some kind of study they
range but virtually everyone is on some
kind of studies and that's if from that
principle actually that strongly limits
what I'm doing and what I won't do so
that's one one way I think we're done
I'm happy to hang around for a few
minutes to answer questions or talk more
thank you
you